gep: add GEP-1731 Configurable Retries (#3199)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-1731/index.md

Reissues requests a given number of times to a backend server if that server does not reply. As soon as the server answers, the middleware stops retrying, _regardless of the response status_. Has an optional configuration to enable an exponential backoff.

* `attempts` Defines how many times the request should be retried.

* `initialInterval` Defines the first wait time in the backoff series. The maximum interval is calculated as twice the `initialInterval`. If unspecified, requests will be retried immediately. The value should be provided in seconds or as a valid duration format.

Supports configuration of a [Circuit Breaker](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/middlewares/http/circuitbreaker/) which could possibly be used to implement budgeted retries. Each router gets its own instance of a given circuit breaker. One circuit breaker instance can be open while the other remains closed: their state is not shared. This is the expected behavior, we want you to be able to define what makes a service healthy without having to declare a circuit breaker for each route.

#### linkerd2-proxy

> TODO

Author: ```suggestion
Linkerd supports a configurable retry budget per-route using its ServiceProfile CRD. The default budget is 20%, but Linkerd also supports a certain number of "extra" retries every second (10 by default), for a better user experience with low-traffic services.

Linkerd is unique in that it does not currently support counted retries, although this is an area of active development.
```

Filling in brief summary on behalf of @kflynn

  * Traefik does not seem to support specifying error codes, and will only retry on backend timeouts.
* `SupportHTTPRRouteRetryCode5xx`
  * Will additionally test arbitrary status codes in the 500-599 (inclusive) range.

Implementations MAY support specifying additional individual error codes in the valid 100-599 (inclusive) range, invalid 600-999 (inclusive) range or prefix shorthands for any `[0-9]xx` range, but none of these will be tested in conformance.

## Alternatives

### Standard RetryPolicy metaresource

This may be a reasonable approach for configuring broad default retry policies, but the UX of using a separate resource could feel overly burdensome for basic use cases or granular configuration, and the structure of the policy attachment model is [currently being revised](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927). Additionally, multiple data plane proxies warn in their documentation about the danger of configuring broad retry policies which may cause logical application errors from replaying non-idempotent requests or overwhelm backends. This approach may still be considered to enable future goals.

### HTTPRoute filter

TODO

> 

Author: ```suggestion
### Should whether to retry on connection errors be configurable?
Retrying on connection errors (disconnect, reset, timeout, TCP failure) is typically default behavior for most dataplanes, even those that don't support configurable retries based on HTTP status codes. Some proxies allow this to be configurable, but retrying attempts on these sort of errors is typically desirable and excluding it from the Gateway API spec both allows a simpler UX with less boilerplate, and avoids nuances between how these are defined and configured in different proxies.

```

  * Traefik does not seem to support specifying error codes, and will only retry on backend timeouts.
* `SupportHTTPRRouteRetryCode5xx`
  * Will additionally test arbitrary status codes in the 500-599 (inclusive) range.

Implementations MAY support specifying additional individual error codes in the valid 100-599 (inclusive) range, invalid 600-999 (inclusive) range or prefix shorthands for any `[0-9]xx` range, but none of these will be tested in conformance.

## Alternatives

### Standard RetryPolicy metaresource

This may be a reasonable approach for configuring broad default retry policies, but the UX of using a separate resource could feel overly burdensome for basic use cases or granular configuration, and the structure of the policy attachment model is [currently being revised](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927). Additionally, multiple data plane proxies warn in their documentation about the danger of configuring broad retry policies which may cause logical application errors from replaying non-idempotent requests or overwhelm backends. This approach may still be considered to enable future goals.

### HTTPRoute filter

> TODO

Author: ```suggestion
TODO

### What accommodations are needed for future retry budget support?
Should the `retry` stanza follow the Kubernetes "tagged union" pattern with something like a `mode: "count"` to allow future design space for `mode: "budget"` with distinct sibling fields?

```

* To allow specification of the maximum number of times to retry a request.
* To allow specification of the minimum backoff interval between retry attempts.
* To define any interaction with configured HTTPRoute [timeouts](/geps/gep-1742/).
* Retry configuration must be applicable to most known Gateway API implementations.

## Future Goals

* To allow specification of gRPC status codes for which a request should be retried.
* To allow specification of a retry ["budget"](https://finagle.github.io/blog/2016/02/08/retry-budgets/) to determine whether a request should be retried, and any shared configuration or interaction with max count retry configuration.

## Non-Goals

* To allow more granular control of the backoff strategy than many dataplanes allow customizing, such as whether to use an exponential backoff interval between retry attempts, add jitter, or cap the backoff interval to a maximum duration.
* To allow specification of a default retry policy for all routes in a given namespace or attached to a particular Gateway.
* A standard API for approaches for retry logic other than max count or "budget", such as interaction with rate limiting headers.

## Introduction

> TODO

Author: ```suggestion
A Gateway API implementation should be able to retry failed HTTP requests to backends before delivering a response to a client for several reasons:

* Network Reliability: Networks can be unreliable, and connections might drop or time out. Retrying requests helps ensure that temporary issues don’t prevent the request from being completed.
* Load Balancing: If a server is temporarily overloaded or down, an implementation can retry the request to another server in a load-balanced environment.
* Error Handling: Some HTTP errors, like 500 Internal Server Error or 503 Service Unavailable, might be transient. Retrying the request can help bypass these temporary issues.

A primary audience for retries in Gateway API configuration are application developers (Ana) who want to ensure their applications are highly available and resilient. These users are best equipped to write sensible configuration, knowing which responses from their application should be retried and tolerances for timeouts and retry attempts to avoid overwhelming their applications with a ["retry storm"](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/antipatterns/retry-storm/) which can cause performance issues, instability or outages.

Several Gateway API dataplanes support configuring retry semantics using their own bespoke configuration, but the details of these implementations and their user-facing configuration lack consistency between vendors. This proposal is an attempt to reconcile a minimal commonly implementable (and sufficiently useful) API from these divergent existing implementations.
```

* `retriable_headers` HTTP response headers for which a backend request should be retried.

* `retriable_request_headers` HTTP headers which must be present in the _request_ for retries to be attempted.

Supports configuring a [RetryBudget](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/cluster/v3/circuit_breaker.proto#envoy-v3-api-msg-config-cluster-v3-circuitbreakers-thresholds-retrybudget) with a following parameters in cluster CircuitBreaker thresholds.

* `budget_percent` Specifies the limit on concurrent retries as a percentage of the sum of active requests and active pending requests. For example, if there are 100 active requests and the budget_percent is set to 25, there may be 25 active retries. This parameter is optional. Defaults to 20%.

* `min_retry_concurrency` Specifies the minimum retry concurrency allowed for the retry budget. The limit on the number of active retries may never go below this number. This parameter is optional. Defaults to 3.

#### NGINX

> The [`proxy_next_upstream`](http://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_proxy_module.html#proxy_next_upstream) directive specifies in which cases a request should be passed to the next server:

Reviewer: Something important to note with this nginx directive is that it will not retry the current server. So if your backend application has 1 replica, if it fails, there are no retries. If your backend applications has multiple replicas, nginx will simply retry by passing the request to each backend server until there are no more or a successful response is returned.

To get real retry logic in nginx as desired in this GEP, a custom module (NJS or otherwise) will likely need to be built.

#### linkerd2-proxy

Linkerd supports a configurable [retry budget](https://linkerd.io/2.15/features/retries-and-timeouts/) per-route using its [ServiceProfile](https://linkerd.io/2.15/reference/service-profiles/) CRD. The default budget is 20%, but Linkerd also supports a certain number of "extra" retries every second (10 by default), for a better user experience with low-traffic services.

Linkerd is unique in that it does not currently support counted retries, although this is an area of active development.

#### F5 BIG-IP

TODO

#### Pipy

TODO

#### Litespeed WebADC

TODO

## API

### Go

```golang
type HTTPRouteRule struct {
    // Retry defines the configuration for when to retry an HTTP request.
    //
    // Support: Extended
    //
    // +optional
    // <gateway:experimental>
    Retry *HTTPRouteRetry `json:"retry,omitempty"`

    // ...
}

// HTTPRouteRetry defines retry configuration for an HTTPRoute.
//
// Implementations MUST retry on connection errors (disconnect, reset, timeout,

> // TCP failure) if a retry stanza is configured.

Reviewer 2: Feedback wanted on this

Author: Specifically, NGINX and HAProxy split out `timeout` from other connection errors and discourage retrying on timeouts, but I believe this advice is less applicable on modern Kubernetes deployments, see Alternatives section at the end for more detail.

Reviewer 2: I'm probably missing something obvious - why wouldn't this class of retry reasons just be populated in `codes`?

Author: Because these aren't status codes, and the precise semantics vary between implementations - for example, Envoy groups `timeout` into the same bucket as `disconnect` and `reset`.

Reviewer 3: ☝️ Gotta agree with Mike here. Meshes make this even weirder: with Linkerd, for example, the state of the connection from one proxy to another is managed independently of requests arriving from the application workload.

Reviewer 2: To clarify, I agree that there are distinct reasons to retry that aren't just HTTP status codes, my concern was more that I implemented this statement as a blanket requirement that all implementations retry on these events if _any_ part of the retry configuration is present. Let's say I want to have code that _only_ retries if I get a specific response, say 502. As written, this seems to prevent that from being expressible. 

As far as I can tell, every proxy makes this behavior optional, so I expected this to be expressed by some kind of entry in the `codes` list, such as `gateway.envoyproxy.io/disconnect` or similar. If we could find some kind of portable way to express this across dataplanes, that would be even better, I'm just a bit uncomfortable with building this behavior in as a hidden (and likely surprising) default.

Author: > I interpreted this statement as a blanket requirement that all implementations retry on these events if any part of the retry configuration is present. Let's say I want to have code that only retries if I get a specific response, say 502. As written, this seems to prevent that from being expressible.

Yes, that's a correct interpretation, with a few motivating factors behind this:
- The capability of splitting up these failure modes granularly varies significantly between implementations.
  - Envoy includes `TCP connection failure` as `connect-failure` in the `5xx` shorthand, but groups `disconnect`, `reset` and `timeout` separately under `reset`, I'm unclear if/how these are distinct.
  - NGINX defines `error` as `An error occurred while establishing a connection with the server, passing a request to it, or reading the response header.` and `timeout` separately as `A timeout has occurred while establishing a connection with the server, passing a request to it, or reading the response header.`
  - HAProxy defines `conn-failure` as `Retry when the connection or the SSL handshake failed and the request could not be sent.` setting this as default behavior, and `response-timeout` separately with a warning it may be inadvisable to retry (see note near bottom of GEP, my theory is that this warning is more applicable to legacy deployment models with a small number of static servers).
- Making this a default behavior reduces the boilerplate required for typical usage.
- I haven't seen _any_ documentation or user story indicating that _not_ retrying on TCP connection failures is a desirable property.

I'd be open to adding something like a separate `excludeRetryOnTimeout` field (open to suggestions for better name) that NGINX and HAProxy (but not Envoy) should be able to implement.

Reviewer 2: Overall I'm uncomfortable with adding default/implied behavior here. If I add configuration that I want to retry exclusively on 502s, I would be surprised if retries happened on other cases. 

I definitely get the idea that _most_ use cases would benefit from this class of retries, but I'm not sure that justifies defaulting to behavior that I think could be surprising to users. Maybe an alternative would be to bucket this class of timeouts into a well known code, and maybe even add that as a default if nothing else is specified in the list? (The defaulting is still a bit messy though as it would make it particularly difficult to say "never retry").

Author: > (The defaulting is still a bit messy though as it would make it particularly difficult to say "never retry").

Hmm, I had considered "never retry" as not likely portable - it appeared only HAProxy supported this explicitly, I suppose setting `attempts: 0` could be a reasonable way to do that though?

> Envoy will default to retrying one time unless explicitly specified
https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/router_filter#x-envoy-max-retries

> I definitely get the idea that most use cases would benefit from this class of retries, but I'm not sure that justifies defaulting to behavior that I think could be surprising to users.

I think behavior that would be beneficial to most use cases is a prime candidate to be a default - Envoy implicitly lumps connection failures in with `5xx` which I think is even more confusing. I could see a case for adding an opt-out like `excludeRetryOnConnectionFailure` as distinct from the proposed opt-out for retry on timeouts I suggested in 0e533c6e8117561535f5be5ebfc39023f6dc1178, but I think only NGINX (and maybe HAProxy?) would be able to implement that.

Reviewer 3: I don't see a practical way to portably talk about retries based on connection state, _especially_ as we move further and further away from HTTP/1 into a world where multiplexing unrelated requests over a long-lived connection is the norm... or a world in which HTTP/3 becomes more common in the cluster.

Maybe just add language to the tune of

```
Implementations MAY additionally retry for reasons related to connection state changes (e.g. a connection timing out or breaking); such behavior is implementation-specific by definition. Applications SHOULD NOT be designed to rely on such behavior as it may be changed by future work in this area.
```

???

Author: The problem I have with MAY is that it makes this behavior entirely unpredictable (SHOULD feels okay and maybe we add an additional separate conformance flag), plus effectively makes writing a conformance test supportable by Traefik impossible even though it supports a functional subset of this feature.

Reviewer 2: I think my preferred path would be to say that implementation-specific defaults for these categories may vary (similar to timeouts), but to leave open a path to specifying them in one large bucket defined by Gateway API. I think grouping all of these into a single bucket into the future could help with the overall UX while also avoiding surprises. The biggest thing I'm trying to avoid is _requiring_ default behavior that at least some users will not find desirable.

I do think that writing conformance tests is going to be tricky here. I don't want to block this entire GEP on this relatively small detail though, as I think we can refine how this part of the spec is worded in the next phase.

Reviewer 2: @mikemorris do you mind adding some kind of `UNRESOLVED` block around this specific part of the spec? So that we don't miss this in the next phase?

Author: Switched recommendation to SHOULD, added conformance flags and warning in 510b708b8e793f98bd2704b8399fd8bcb2f86ae5

    //
    // If a Request timeout (`rules[].timeouts.request`) is configured on the
    // route, the entire duration of the initial request and any retry attempts
    // MUST not exceed the Request timeout duration. If any retry attempts are
    // still in progress when the Request timeout duration has been reached,
    // these SHOULD be cancelled if possible and the Gateway MUST immediately
    // return a timeout error.
    //
    // If a BackendRequest timeout (`rules[].timeouts.backendRequest`) is
    // configured on the route, any retry attempts which reach the configured
    // BackendRequest timeout duration without a response SHOULD be cancelled if
    // possible and the Gateway should wait for at least the specified backoff
    // duration before attempting to retry the backend request again.
    //
    // If a BackendRequest timeout is _not_ configured on the route, retry
    // attempts MAY time out after an implementation default duration, or MAY
    // remain pending until a configured Request timeout or implementation
    // default duration for total request time is reached.
    //
    // When this field is unspecified, the time to wait between retry attempts

>     // is implementation-specific.

Reviewer 4: This covers everything I can think of on an initial read, great work.

    //
    // Support: Extended
    //
    // +optional
    Backoff *Duration `json:"backoff,omitempty"`
}

// HTTPRouteRetryStatusCode defines an HTTP response status code for
// which a backend request should be retried.
//
// Implementations MUST support the following status codes as retryable:
//
// * "500"
// * "502"
// * "503"
// * "504"
//

> // Implementations SHOULD support the `"5xx"` shorthand for matching any

Reviewer 2: It feels like the SHOULD and MUST are reversed here. IMO, it's likely going to be more portable to retry on any 5xx request than supporting specifying each 5xx code independently.

Reviewer 2: It may be worth defining a couple Gateway values that we expect to be portable and have extended support:

- `5xx` for any 500-599 (inclusive) status
- `4xx` for any 400-499 (inclusive) status

We could potentially leave some wiggle room here where 5xx means at least 500, 502, 503, and 504, while 4xx means at least 400, 401, 403, 404, and 429. (Not completely sure on the list we'd want there, but specifying a minimum set of error codes that MUST be covered could help with portability).

Reviewer 3: Retrying 400, 401, 403, 404, and 429 will almost always be a bad idea in practice -- there's a reason why Envoy only includes 409 in the `retriable-4xx` group. 🙂 I would honestly be OK with MUST support 5xx, MAY support 600-999, SHOULD NOT (but MAY) support 100-499. (IIRC, in Emissary-land we ran into one or two cases where someone really, really wanted to retry something that wasn't a 5yz, but only one or two cases. It was NOT common.)

Reviewer 2: Haha yes, I think you're completely right. Apparently I was commenting a bit too late into my day/week. Agree with @kflynn's latest comment.

Author: Is retrying 429s really a bad idea? That code in particular seems like it should be retried, just with some additional logic/delay that I didn't want to get into here yet (and could possibly be part of a GEP for https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/326 at some point in the future).

Reviewer 3: If you don't parse and honor `Retry-After`, or if there is no `Retry-After`, then retrying 429 is a disaster. 🙂  If you _do_ parse and honor `Retry-After`...

_&lt;semireligious&gt;_

...it's not a disaster but it's still a bad idea. 🙂 

1. `Retry-After` frequently specifies a largish interval (it's not uncommon to talk about rate limits in terms of "requests per hour" or "requests per day"). Chances are really good that the `Retry-After` interval will be much longer than the request timeout anyway.

2. The 4yz codes are really meant to say "hey client, you made a mistake" rather than "hey client, something went wrong on the server". In general, the client needs to do something different to clear the condition, so retrying without consulting the client is very rarely a good idea.

_&lt;/semireligious&gt;_

So... maybe let's not? It feels like a better idea to direct that effort elsewhere, to me anyway.

Author: > It feels like the SHOULD and MUST are reversed here. IMO, it's likely going to be more portable to retry on any 5xx request than supporting specifying each 5xx code independently.

While I agree with the relative importance of each of these from a Gateway API end user perspective (`"5xx"` is simpler and more useful), the SHOULD and MUST here was informed by existing proxy implementations of retry logic. I tightened up the scope of what 5xx means to hopefully allow more portability, and I'm open to moving it from SHOULD to MUST with support from additional non-Envoy implementations.

Author: > If you don't parse and honor Retry-After, or if there is no Retry-After, then retrying 429 is a disaster. 🙂 If you do parse and honor Retry-After...

Thinking back to when I've interacted with 429 codes previously, it was mostly rate limited APIs informing a script or client that a limit was exceeded, and the resolution required some manual intervention like rotating API keys, rotating IP addresses or subscribing to a higher-tier plan so yea this makes more sense to me now that implementing `Retry-After` support wouldn't be the highest priority for a gateway relaying requests.

// status code in the 500-599 range, and SHOULD support specifying any

> // status code within the valid 100-599 (inclusive) range.

Reviewer 2: 100-599 as an inclusive range seems too broad. What happens if someone wants to retry on 200 statuses? I think it would be safer to leave out any suggestion of support for status codes <400.

Reviewer 3: (See above, I'd vote for SHOULD NOT (but MAY) 100-499.)

Author: Is retrying 429s really a bad idea? That code in particular seems like it _should_ be retried, just with some additional logic/delay that I didn't want to get into here yet (and could possibly be part of a GEP for https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/326 at some point in the future).

Author: Added `SHOULD NOT support 100-399` and `MAY support 400-499` with a warning, consolidating this discussion into thread above.

//
// Implementations MAY support values in the 600-999 (inclusive) range,
// which are not valid for HTTP clients, but are sometimes used for
// communicating application-specific errors, or additional shorthand 
// codes for any `[0-9]xx` range.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^[1-9](?:[0-9][0-9]|xx)$`

> type HTTPRouteRetryStatusCode string

Reviewer 2: As we've seen in upstream Kubernetes with the `intOrString` type, this can unfortunately get rather messy. I think it may be safer to have a struct where you can specify either a string `name` or int `code`.

Reviewer 3: This is a feature that **A**na (the **a**pplication dev) is likely to be dealing with. From Ana's point of view, this is probably ideal:

```yaml
retry:
  codes: [ 500, 502, connect-failure ]
  attempts: 5
  backoff: 100ms
```

That will feel natural to Ana, but it requires `intOrString` and breaks structural schemas. 🙁 Having a simple string here, as @mikemorris does, is probably the next simplest thing, again from Ana's PoV:

```yaml
retry:
  codes: [ "500", "502", "connect-failure" ]
  attempts: 5
  backoff: 100ms
```

She may be annoyed at having to remember to quote things, but it's consistent and it gets validated at apply time... and it's _very_ hard to come up with a way that it benefits _Ana_ to make her do

```yaml
retry:
  codes:
    - status: 500
    - status: 502
    - name: connect-failure
  attempts: 5
  backoff: 100ms
```

Reviewer 2: I really dislike mixed string + int types, but especially since we're likely going to have "5xx" as not just a supported value, but potentially the _only_ portable value, I think I could get behind strings here.

Author: Resolving this planning to stick to all string values as currently proposed.

| Emissary Ingress                         | Envoy            |
| Envoy Gateway                            | Envoy            |
| Flomesh Service Mesh                     | Pipy             |
| Gloo Edge                                | Envoy            |
| Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE)           | Similar to Envoy |
| HAProxy Ingress                          | HAProxy          |
| Hashicorp Consul                         | Envoy            |
| Istio                                    | Envoy            |
| Kong                                     | NGINX            |
| Kuma                                     | Envoy            |
| Linkerd                                  | linkerd2-proxy   |
| Litespeed                                | Litespeed WebADC |
| NGINX Gateway Fabric                     | NGINX            |
| Traefik                                  | Traefik          |
| VMWare Avi Load Balancer                 | ?                |

Implementation retry configuration details below have been summarized or copied verbatim from corresponding project documentation, with links to the original source where applicable.

<details>

>   <summary>Envoy</summary>

Reviewer 5: Not sure if this is a website bug or user error but the markdown within this doesn't render on the site FYI

Reviewer 5: Maybe doesn't handle mixed HTML

Author: Ahh alright - it's dependent on the Markdown parser so GitHub flavored Markdown does support it, will clean this up so it's clear on web.

    //
    // +optional
    Backoff *Duration `json:"backoff,omitempty"`
}

// HTTPRouteRetryStatusCode defines an HTTP response status code for
// which a backend request should be retried.
//
// Implementations MUST support the following status codes as retryable:
//
// * "500"
// * "502"
// * "503"
// * "504"
//
// Implementations SHOULD support the `"5xx"` shorthand for matching status
// codes in the 500-599 range. For implementations supporting `"5xx"`, this
// shorthand MUST match the following status codes:
//
// * "500"
// * "502"
// * "503"
// * "504"
//
// The `"5xx"` shorthand MAY additionally match a well-documented subset of
// arbitrary status codes in the 500-599 range, or match all status codes in
// this range.
//
// Implementations SHOULD NOT support retrying status codes in the 100-399
// range, as these responses are generally not appropriate to retry.
//
// Implementations MAY support specifying discrete values in the 400-499 range,
// which are often inadvisable to retry, and MAY support discrete values in the
// 600-999 (inclusive) range, which are not valid for HTTP clients, but are
// sometimes used for communicating application-specific errors.
//

> // Implementations MAY support additional shorthand codes for any `[0-9]xx`
> // range.
> //

Author: ```suggestion
```
Is this a bad idea? Open to dropping this.

Reviewer 2: I think we should probably actually follow the pattern we've used elsewhere, as annoying as it is:

1. Only the values defined by Gateway API do not need a prefix (any int status code within a specified range)
2. Everything else needs to be domain-prefixed until it's defined by Gateway API

That's admittedly rather annoying, but it does ensure that if/when we want to define 5xx or other similar shortcuts, we can without trampling over existing uses.

Author: Hmmm, feels like that would be slightly awkward for an end user, but does at least clearly indicate they're using non-standard functionality. TBH I can't forsee any range beyond 5xx having a path to becoming standardized given the stability of the upstream HTTP status code specification here, but okay adding this formatting.

Author: Hmmm, feels like that would be slightly awkward for an end user, but does at least clearly indicate they're using non-standard functionality. TBH I can't forsee any range beyond 5xx having a path to becoming standardized given the stability of the upstream HTTP status code specification here, but okay either adding this formatting or dropping this suggestion entirely.

```suggestion
// Implementations MAY support additional shorthand codes for any `[0-9]xx`
// range, but if doing so MUST use an implementation-specific domain prefix,
// such as `envoyproxy.io/4xx`.
//
```

Author: Thinking about this more, I'd really rather remove this line, as it feels like it will immediately be stretched for implementation-specific "retry on" semantics beyond status codes to mirror existing proxy configuration (e.g. `envoyproxy.io/envoy-ratelimited`), and allowing this implicitly guides users toward non-portable configuration.

// Duration is a string value representing a duration in time. The foramat is
// as specified in GEP-2257, a strict subset of the syntax parsed by Golang
// time.ParseDuration.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^([0-9]{1,5}(h|m|s|ms)){1,4}$`
type Duration string
```

### YAML

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: retry-example
spec:
  ...
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: some-service
      port: 8080
      retry:
        codes:
        - 5xx
        attempts: 2
        backoff: 100ms
```

## Conformance Details

Basic support for configuring retries in HTTPRoute up to a specified maximum count and with a minimum duration between attempts will be gated on the `SupportHTTPRouteRetry` feature. Retries will be tested in combination with request and backend timeouts if supported by the implementation.

Retrying requests based on HTTP status codes will be gated under the following features:

* `SupportHTTPRRouteRetryCodes`
  * Only 500, 502, 503 and 504 will be tested for conformance.
  * Traefik does not seem to support specifying error codes, and will only retry on backend timeouts.
* `SupportHTTPRRouteRetryCode5xx`

>   * Will additionally test arbitrary status codes in the 500-599 (inclusive) range.

Author: ```suggestion
  * 500, 502, 503 and 504 will all be tested for conformance.
  * Arbitrary status codes in the 500-599 (inclusive) range will not be tested for conformance.
```
Updating per narrowed proposed scope of `"5xx"` shorthand.

* To allow specification of the maximum number of times to retry a request.
* To allow specification of the minimum backoff interval between retry attempts.
* To define any interaction with configured HTTPRoute [timeouts](/geps/gep-1742/).
* Retry configuration must be applicable to most known Gateway API implementations.

## Future Goals

* To allow specification of gRPC status codes for which a request should be retried.
* To allow specification of a retry ["budget"](https://finagle.github.io/blog/2016/02/08/retry-budgets/) to determine whether a request should be retried, and any shared configuration or interaction with max count retry configuration.

## Non-Goals

* To allow more granular control of the backoff strategy than many dataplanes allow customizing, such as whether to use an exponential backoff interval between retry attempts, add jitter, or cap the backoff interval to a maximum duration.
* To allow specification of a default retry policy for all routes in a given namespace or attached to a particular Gateway.
* A standard API for approaches for retry logic other than max count or "budget", such as interaction with rate limiting headers.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
* Support for unary or bidirectional streams, which may have different considerations for timeouts or request/response patterns within the stream after establishment.

```

  * 500, 502, 503 and 504 will all be tested for conformance.
  * Arbitrary status codes in the 500-599 (inclusive) range will not be tested for conformance.

Implementations MAY support specifying additional individual error codes in the valid 100-599 (inclusive) range, invalid 600-999 (inclusive) range or prefix shorthands for any `[0-9]xx` range, but none of these will be tested in conformance.

## Alternatives

### Standard RetryPolicy metaresource

This may be a reasonable approach for configuring broad default retry policies, but the UX of using a separate resource could feel overly burdensome for basic use cases or granular configuration, and the structure of the policy attachment model is [currently being revised](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927). Additionally, multiple data plane proxies warn in their documentation about the danger of configuring broad retry policies which may cause logical application errors from replaying non-idempotent requests or overwhelm backends. This approach may still be considered to enable future goals.

### HTTPRoute filter

TODO

### What accommodations are needed for future retry budget support?

> Should the `retry` stanza follow the Kubernetes "tagged union" pattern with something like a `mode: "count"` to allow future design space for `mode: "budget"` with distinct sibling fields?

Author: Seeking feedback on this.

Reviewer 4: We _can_ add this later without it being a breaking change as long as `mode: count` is defaulted if not present, that's not a breaking change. I think it's likely we'll use it for budgeted retries in the future, but that means we can probably get away with not adding it now.

Reviewer 4: This is especially true since it seems like `attempts` will be mutually exclusive with `budget` or whatever.

Reviewer 2: Agree with the outcome of this discussion, just would recommend capturing this in the GEP.

# GEP-1731: Configurable Retries

* Issue: [#1731](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/1731)
* Status: Implementable

(See status definitions [here](/geps/overview/#gep-states).)

## TLDR

To allow configuration of a Gateway to retry unsuccessful requests to backends before sending a response to a client request.

## Goals

* To allow specification of [HTTP status codes](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#name-overview-of-status-codes) for which a request should be retried.
* To allow specification of the maximum number of times to retry a request.
* To allow specification of the minimum backoff interval between retry attempts.
* To define any interaction with configured HTTPRoute [timeouts](/geps/gep-1742/).
* Retry configuration must be applicable to most known Gateway API implementations.

## Future Goals

* To allow specification of gRPC status codes for which a request should be retried.
* To allow specification of a retry ["budget"](https://finagle.github.io/blog/2016/02/08/retry-budgets/) to determine whether a request should be retried, and any shared configuration or interaction with max count retry configuration.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
* Define more precise semantics for retry configuration on "consumer" vs "producer" routes for mesh implementations.

```

# GEP-1731: Configurable Retries

* Issue: [#1731](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/1731)
* Status: Implementable

(See status definitions [here](/geps/overview/#gep-states).)

## TLDR

To allow configuration of a Gateway to retry unsuccessful requests to backends before sending a response to a client request.

## Goals

* To allow specification of [HTTP status codes](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#name-overview-of-status-codes) for which a request should be retried.
* To allow specification of the maximum number of times to retry a request.
* To allow specification of the minimum backoff interval between retry attempts.
* To define any interaction with configured HTTPRoute [timeouts](/geps/gep-1742/).
* Retry configuration must be applicable to most known Gateway API implementations.

## Future Goals

> * To allow specification of gRPC status codes for which a request should be retried.

Reviewer 2: Although it's annoying, I think it may be easier to keep GRPCRoute retries in a separate GEP so that doesn't slow down the graduation of these fields.

The `max_fails` and `fail_timeout` parameters in the [`server`](http://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_upstream_module.html#server) block of an [`upstream`](<http://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_upstream_module.html>) module may also interact with retry logic.

* `max_fails=number` Sets the number of unsuccessful attempts to communicate with the server that should happen in the duration set by the `fail_timeout` parameter to consider the server unavailable for a duration also set by the `fail_timeout` parameter. By default, the number of unsuccessful attempts is set to 1. The zero value disables the accounting of attempts. What is considered an unsuccessful attempt is defined by the proxy_next_upstream, fastcgi_next_upstream, uwsgi_next_upstream, scgi_next_upstream, memcached_next_upstream, and grpc_next_upstream directives.

* `fail_timeout=time` Sets the time during which the specified number of unsuccessful attempts to communicate with the server should happen to consider the server unavailable; and the period of time the server will be considered unavailable. By default, the parameter is set to 10 seconds. Equivalent to Gateway API Request timeout.

> May be possible to implement more advanced logic through Lua scripting.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
May be possible to implement more advanced logic through Lua scripting or NGINX JavaScript.
```

// TCP failure) if a retry stanza is configured.
//
type HTTPRouteRetry struct {
    // Codes defines the HTTP response status codes for which a backend request
    // should be retried.
    //
    // Support: Extended
    //
    // +optional
    // <gateway:experimental>
    Codes []HTTPRouteRetryStatusCode `json:"codes,omitempty"`

    // Attempts specifies the maxmimum number of times an individual request
    // from the gateway to a backend should be retried.
    //
    // If the maximum number of retries has been attempted without a successful
    // response from the backend, the Gateway MUST return an error.
    //
    // When this field is unspecified, the number of times to attempt to retry
    // a backend request is implementation-specific.
    //
    // Support: Extended
    //
    // +optional
    Attempts *Int `json:"attempts,omitempty"`

    // Backoff specifies the minimum duration a Gateway should wait between
    // retry attempts and is represented in Gateway API Duration formatting.
    //
    // For example, setting the `rules[].retry.backoff` field to the value
    // `100ms` will cause a backend request to first be retried approximately

>     // 100 milliseconds after timing out or reciveing a response code configured

Reviewer 6: nit:
```suggestion
    // 100 milliseconds after timing out or receiving a response code configured
```

    // possible and the Gateway should wait for at least the specified backoff
    // duration before attempting to retry the backend request again.
    //
    // If a BackendRequest timeout is _not_ configured on the route, retry
    // attempts MAY time out after an implementation default duration, or MAY
    // remain pending until a configured Request timeout or implementation
    // default duration for total request time is reached.
    //
    // When this field is unspecified, the time to wait between retry attempts
    // is implementation-specific.
    //
    // Support: Extended
    //
    // +optional
    Backoff *Duration `json:"backoff,omitempty"`
}

// HTTPRouteRetryStatusCode defines an HTTP response status code for
// which a backend request should be retried.
//
// Implementations MUST support the following status codes as retryable:
//
// * "500"
// * "502"
// * "503"
// * "504"
//
// Implementations SHOULD support the `"5xx"` shorthand for matching status
// codes in the 500-599 range. For implementations supporting `"5xx"`, this
// shorthand MUST match the following status codes:
//
// * "500"
// * "502"
// * "503"

> // * "504"

Reviewer 2: I think if we're going to define 5xx so narrowly (all of the status codes we require to be supported combined), we may want to just make this a standard value that also must be supported.

Reviewer 2: An alternative would be to _require_ that 5xx matched all codes between 500-599 which would be less likely to surprise users but also less portable. The more I think about this, the more I think that we should require 5xx to support the full range of codes and consider it extended. (I know this somewhat conflicts with some of my earlier ideas).

Reviewer 4: Hmm, agreed. I think that I would be pretty surprised if `5xx` did not mean "any code in the 500 range", rather than specific ones in a list.

Author: We could also consider adding something like Envoy's `gateway-error` which includes 502, 503 and 504 (notably lacking 500, which I think we would want to include).

Reviewer 3: How about:

- `gateway-error`: 502, 503, 504
- `5xx`: 500-599
- if you want 500, 502, 503, 504 you use `[ "500", "gateway-error" ]`

??

I could also imagine `common-5xx` or `retriable-5xx` for 500, 502, 503, 504, but I'm not really sure that's _better_, just different.

Author: I'm starting to lean toward just removing `5xx` if it's most logical for it to be 500-599 because the existence of 501 implies the need for an additional `excludeCode` stanza only to support 5xx which is a bit wonky and verbose.

Reviewer 4: It's probably fine to take out `5xx` for now, and add _something_ back in once we get feedback about what people actually want.

Author: Removed 5xx shorthand and switched HTTPRouteRetryStatusCode from `string` to `int` in 04e31dc33788ffef145ede61ae18e17b63720a1e

//
// The `"5xx"` shorthand MAY additionally match a well-documented subset of
// arbitrary status codes in the 500-599 range, or match all status codes in
// this range.
//
// Implementations SHOULD NOT support retrying status codes in the 100-399
// range, as these responses are generally not appropriate to retry.
//
// Implementations MAY support specifying discrete values in the 400-499 range,
// which are often inadvisable to retry, and MAY support discrete values in the
// 600-999 (inclusive) range, which are not valid for HTTP clients, but are
// sometimes used for communicating application-specific errors.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^[1-9](?:[0-9][0-9]|xx)$`
type HTTPRouteRetryStatusCode string

// Duration is a string value representing a duration in time. The foramat is
// as specified in GEP-2257, a strict subset of the syntax parsed by Golang
// time.ParseDuration.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^([0-9]{1,5}(h|m|s|ms)){1,4}$`
type Duration string
```

### YAML

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: retry-example
spec:
  ...

>   rules:
>   - backendRefs:
>     - name: some-service
>       port: 8080

Author: ```suggestion
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        value: "/foo"
      headers:
      - name: "version"
        value: "v2"
    - path:
        value: "/v2/foo"
    backendRefs:
    - name: foo-v2
      port: 8080
      weight: 90
    - name: foo-v2-canary
      port: 8080
      weight: 10
```
Expanding the example to be a more complex HTTPRouteRule with multiple matches and backends to clarify the `retry` stanza will apply to all matches and backends within a given rule.

/cc @linsun

    retry:
      codes:
      - 5xx
      attempts: 2

>       backoff: 100ms

Reviewer 7: This is a nice example showing retry for a backend service.  Would be good to have an example of retry for the entire route as well, which I assume it is possible.

Author: Hmm, that's a good question and **I think the YAML formatting is actually indented slightly wrong here, giving an inaccurate impression of the proposed structure** - I'll fix that.

---

This is currently proposed as scoping the `retry` stanza to an individual HTTPRouteRule (and _all_ backendRefs on the rule), which is the same scoping as [`timeouts`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.HTTPRouteTimeouts), [`filters`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.HTTPRouteFilter) and [`sessionPersistance`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.SessionPersistence).

Given that the `matches` clauses in a single rule are OR'd together, a single HTTPRouteRule clause can be quite comprehensive, and would generally be sufficient for configuring the retry logic for many inbound paths/matches to a given set of backends (such as `foo` and a `foo-v2` canary).
> Each match is independent, i.e. this rule will be matched if any one of the matches is satisfied.
https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io%2fv1.HTTPRouteRule

We could _additionally_ allow specifying a more granular retry stanza for a specific backend within a rule (which I believe is what's currently implied by the inaccurate YAML), which has prior art with [`filters`](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.HTTPRouteFilter), but I don't think that's necessary in an initial implementation and should only be considered if we get significant user feedback asking for that capability.

Reviewer 3: FWIW I agree that per-backend retries is a thing we should only do with strong user feedback. If the common case is for Ana to consider all the backends on a route as logically equivalent (which I believe it is) then I expect that we won't need per-backend retries for a long while.

```

## Conformance Details

Basic support for configuring retries in HTTPRoute up to a specified maximum count and with a minimum duration between attempts will be gated on the `SupportHTTPRouteRetry` feature. Retries will be tested in combination with request and backend timeouts if supported by the implementation.

Retrying requests based on HTTP status codes will be gated under the following features:

> * `SupportHTTPRRouteRetryCodes`
>   * Only 500, 502, 503 and 504 will be tested for conformance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `SupportHTTPRRouteRetryCodes`

  * Only 500, 502, 503 and 504 will be tested for conformance.
```

Unfortunately our docs-gen requires a new line above new lists, I think this will work for the indentation, but ultimately will need to confirm with deploy preview: https://deploy-preview-3199--kubernetes-sigs-gateway-api.netlify.app/geps/gep-1731/#conformance-details.

I think there are likely several places that could benefit from this change.

### HTTPRoute filter

Implementing a `requestRetryPolicy` [HTTPRouteFilter](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.HTTPRouteFilter) type is likely a reasonable alternative implementation (with the downside of slightly deeping nesting and more complex structural configuration) that was not fully explored.

Adding a new field to HTTPRouteRule instead is proposed for parity with the similar and intersecting configuration of [HTTPRouteTimeouts](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.HTTPRouteTimeouts).

> ### What accommodations are needed for future retry budget support?

Reviewer 2: Nit: Might help to put this and the following questions in a new "Open Questions" or "Considerations" section instead of "Alternatives"

// arbitrary status codes in the 500-599 range, or match all status codes in
// this range.
//
// Implementations SHOULD NOT support retrying status codes in the 100-399
// range, as these responses are generally not appropriate to retry.
//
// Implementations MAY support specifying discrete values in the 400-499 range,
// which are often inadvisable to retry, and MAY support discrete values in the
// 600-999 (inclusive) range, which are not valid for HTTP clients, but are
// sometimes used for communicating application-specific errors.
//
// Implementations MAY support additional shorthand codes for any `[0-9]xx`
// range.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^[1-9](?:[0-9][0-9]|xx)$`
type HTTPRouteRetryStatusCode string

// Duration is a string value representing a duration in time. The foramat is
// as specified in GEP-2257, a strict subset of the syntax parsed by Golang
// time.ParseDuration.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^([0-9]{1,5}(h|m|s|ms)){1,4}$`
type Duration string
```

### YAML

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: retry-example
spec:
  ...
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: some-service
      port: 8080

>       retry:
>         codes:
>         - 5xx
>         attempts: 2
>         backoff: 100ms

Author: ```suggestion
    retry:
      codes:
      - 5xx
      attempts: 2
      backoff: 100ms
```
Fixup YAML to nest retry stanza under HTTPRouteRule, not BackendRefs

* `SupportHTTPRRouteRetryCode5xx`
  * 500, 502, 503 and 504 will all be tested for conformance.
  * Arbitrary status codes in the 500-599 (inclusive) range will not be tested for conformance.

Implementations MAY support specifying additional individual error codes in the valid 100-599 (inclusive) range, invalid 600-999 (inclusive) range or prefix shorthands for any `[0-9]xx` range, but none of these will be tested in conformance.

## Alternatives

### Standard RetryPolicy metaresource

This may be a reasonable approach for configuring broad default retry policies, but the UX of using a separate resource could feel overly burdensome for basic use cases or granular configuration, and the structure of the policy attachment model is [currently being revised](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/2927). Additionally, multiple data plane proxies warn in their documentation about the danger of configuring broad retry policies which may cause logical application errors from replaying non-idempotent requests or overwhelm backends. This approach may still be considered to enable future goals.

### HTTPRoute filter

> TODO

Author: ```suggestion
Implementing a `requestRetryPolicy` [HTTPRouteFilter](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.HTTPRouteFilter) type is likely a reasonable alternative implementation (with the downside of slightly deeping nesting and more complex structural configuration) that was not fully explored.

Adding a new field to HTTPRouteRule instead is proposed for parity with the similar and intersecting configuration of [HTTPRouteTimeouts](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1.HTTPRouteTimeouts).
```

* To define any interaction with configured HTTPRoute [timeouts](/geps/gep-1742/).
* Retry configuration must be applicable to most known Gateway API implementations.

## Future Goals

* To allow specification of a retry ["budget"](https://finagle.github.io/blog/2016/02/08/retry-budgets/) to determine whether a request should be retried, and any shared configuration or interaction with max count retry configuration.
* Define more precise semantics for retry configuration on "consumer" vs "producer" routes for mesh implementations.

## Non-Goals

* To allow more granular control of the backoff strategy than many dataplanes allow customizing, such as whether to use an exponential backoff interval between retry attempts, add jitter, or cap the backoff interval to a maximum duration.
* To allow specification of a default retry policy for all routes in a given namespace or attached to a particular Gateway.
* A standard API for approaches for retry logic other than max count or "budget", such as interaction with rate limiting headers.
* To allow specification of gRPC status codes for which a request should be retried (this should be covered in a separate GEP).

> * Support for unary or bidirectional streams, which may have different considerations for timeouts or request/response patterns within the stream after establishment (this should be a separate GEP).

Reviewer 3: This language is odd to me (I keep reading it as "unary streams and bidirectional streams") and this feels more like something we'll want in another GEP anyway. Maybe

```suggestion
* Support for streaming or bidirectional APIs (these could be covered by a future GEP).
```

Reissues requests a given number of times to a backend server if that server does not reply. As soon as the server answers, the middleware stops retrying, _regardless of the response status_. Has an optional configuration to enable an exponential backoff.

* `attempts` Defines how many times the request should be retried.

* `initialInterval` Defines the first wait time in the backoff series. The maximum interval is calculated as twice the `initialInterval`. If unspecified, requests will be retried immediately. The value should be provided in seconds or as a valid duration format.

Supports configuration of a [Circuit Breaker](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/middlewares/http/circuitbreaker/) which could possibly be used to implement budgeted retries. Each router gets its own instance of a given circuit breaker. One circuit breaker instance can be open while the other remains closed: their state is not shared. This is the expected behavior, we want you to be able to define what makes a service healthy without having to declare a circuit breaker for each route.

#### linkerd2-proxy

> Linkerd supports a configurable [retry budget](https://linkerd.io/2.15/features/retries-and-timeouts/) per-route using its [ServiceProfile](https://linkerd.io/2.15/reference/service-profiles/) CRD. The default budget is 20%, but Linkerd also supports a certain number of "extra" retries every second (10 by default), for a better user experience with low-traffic services.
> 
> Linkerd is unique in that it does not currently support counted retries, although this is an area of active development.

Reviewer 3: Linkerd has changed quite a bit very recently:

```suggestion
Linkerd supports [budgeted retries](https://linkerd.io/2.15/features/retries-and-timeouts/) and - as of [edge-24.7.5](https://github.com/linkerd/linkerd2/releases/tag/edge-24.7.5) - counted retries. In all cases, retries are implemented by the `linkerd2-proxy` making the request on behalf on an application workload.
	
Linkerd's budgeted retries allow retrying an indefinite number of times, as long as the fraction of retries remains within the budget. Budgeted retries are supported only using Linkerd's native ServiceProfile CRD, which allows enabling retries, setting the retry budget (by default, 20% plus 10 "extra" retries per second), and configuring the window over which the fraction of retries to non-retries is calculated.
	
Linkerd's counted retries work in much the same way as other retry implementations, permitted a fixed maximum number of retries for a given request. Counted retries can be configured with annotations on Service, HTTPRoute, and GRPCRoute resources, all of which allow setting the maximum number of retries and the maximum time a request will be permitted to linger before cancelling it and retrying.
	
For Service and HTTPRoute, Linkerd permits setting which HTTP statuses will be retried. For Service and GRPCRoute, Linkerd permits setting which gRPC statuses will be retried. Retry configurations on HTTPRoute and GRPCRoute resources take precedence over retry configurations on Service resources.
	
Neither type of Linkerd retries supports configuring retries based on connection status (e.g. connection timed out). The `linkerd2-proxy` maintains long-lived connections to destinations in use, and manages connection state independently of the application making requests. In this world, individual requests don't correlate well with connections being made or broken, which means that retries on connection state changes don't really make sense.
```

For Service and HTTPRoute, Linkerd permits setting which HTTP statuses will be retried. For Service and GRPCRoute, Linkerd permits setting which gRPC statuses will be retried. Retry configurations on HTTPRoute and GRPCRoute resources take precedence over retry configurations on Service resources.

Neither type of Linkerd retries supports configuring retries based on connection status (e.g. connection timed out). The `linkerd2-proxy` maintains long-lived connections to destinations in use, and manages connection state independently of the application making requests. In this world, individual requests don't correlate well with connections being made or broken, which means that retries on connection state changes don't really make sense.

#### F5 BIG-IP

TODO

#### Pipy

TODO

#### Litespeed WebADC

TODO

## API

> !! warning

Author: ```suggestion
!!! warning
```
